Regulation of enzyme activity can capture changes in enviromental conditions
Regulation of what enzymes are in the cell allows for slow adaptation to changes in environmental conditions
A metabolic pathway consists of several enzymes, so maybe consider including different enzymes: varying k_cat.
consider adding enzyme inhibitors to check that things are not getting uncontroledo
model extracellular enzymes to reflect the transport of substrates in the surroundings, their acquisition, and transport across the membrane for subsequ3ent intracellular metabolism.
OC


Tue Apr 21 13:24:33 CEST 2020

Fix a realistic interval for chemical potentials in order to calculate reasonable Keq!


Wed Apr 22 12:23:20 CEST 2020

The smallest the gibbs energy change corresponds to the reaction m_0 --> m_1, because only m_0 is present at the beggining. Sometimes, that energy change is greater than 4 DeltaG ATP, so no reaction is possible. 
The reaction network stops being generated when the last metabolite is produced. This means that only one arrow will arrive to the last metabolite, and never more. I don't know how realistic is this.


Fri Apr 24 18:40:09 CEST 2020

I have found out that the reaction networks I am creating are actually very similar between each other. Come up with a different way, so that it is acually more varied.
Another problem I have found is the Keqs. Sometimes they are too big, and sometimes they are too small. I don't know how to keep them at a normal level, because I choose my reactions according to the 4 Delta G limit, and I still obtain huge amounts!!
I need to find a way to deal with big Keqs when calculating rates. Sometimes they yield nans, and that isn't cool.


Sat Apr 25 19:02:24 CEST 2020

Make sure that concentrations are always positive!

Tue May 19 13:48:56 CEST 2020

Going back to work after exams: what the hell is total reactions?

May 22,2020

Maybe qualitatively different reaction networks give different dynamics. Is it worth studying the effect of reaction network type in the ecosystem dynamics
What is the deal with the eta matrix? how do you choose it?
I transform negative elements to 0, I hope that is okay if the timestep is small enough right?

May 25,2020

Maybe I am able to vectorize the loop trhough all strains... 
How do I choose the number of reactions happening?

May 26,2020

Change supply and dilution rates accordingly so that substrate concentrations don't diverge?
I can store the intake - output that a certain community has and plot it against the final richness
I can also store the rate at which the population decreases for each strain (asymptotically)
Group selection??
Introduce a new population in the remanents of an old one; population ingeneering...j
How does the number of reactions affect the performance?
Analytical work with this model?


May 28,2020

Less reactions more energetic == More reactions less energetic (only in terms of energy)
The deal with negative concentrations. Precision errors can turn low concentrations to negative ones. If this happens, the population will decrease, in the next time step, decreasing the demand of the metabolite with low concentration. As a result of this, in the following time step that concentration will increase. This yields oscillatory stable dynamics.
In order to avoid oscilations, one could try to set negative concentrations to 0. However, the population (and the metabolites produced by its metabolism) diverges oscillatorily. This is caused because a concentration of 0 lowers the population a bit, but not as much as the mathematically obtained negative concentration would. This is why in the next step, the supply of metabolite will increase the population more than it was decreased in the previous step, by a 0-metabolite concentration that should have been negative.Consequently, the population increases monotonously.

Jun 01,2020

I can create a function to assign probabilities to each integer by binning what is around int, and use it to directly sample integers normally distributed. This allows me to draw integers with replacement.

Jun 02,2020

It looks like forcing microbes to be generalists (varied pathways) generates higher richnes. In the model, generalists are favored over specialists. Is this realistic?
First I have to take advantage of full power of the model, to then start doing other treatments. I have to find values for constants, etc...


Jun 05,2020

Representing individual performance versus actual performance in the community yields a very mild positive correlation, which is what we would expect. The line x = y is an upper limit of this plot. This means that no species in the community performs better than by itself. 
It would be nice to plot this points with varying size depending on how many members the community has.

Jun 06,2020

Plot the total reaction network of surviving species
Vary the type of reaction network that each species can have
Implement a more efficient individual performance calculator.

Jun 06,2020

Simulate a lot of stuf for different reaction number and try to plot the phase transition from f being predictive to it not being predictive at all.
I found out that mean individual performance is a good prpedictor when communities have low richness. I interpret this as the winning species being able to outperform in all circumstances. This is not the interesting regime (its also not the realistic one). We are looking for communities which structure is shaped by interactions between community members.

Jun 07,2020

Investigate the influence of temperature in community persistence??
Characterize how are the reaction networks of species that survive in communities where individual performance is not a predictor of community structure. Maybe that is where the Lyapunov function numerical equivalent can be found. 

Investigate why for large m, s, num_reac, n_simul, the individual integration stops at some point.

Profile code to see why is it slow for high number of metabolites (even when the reaction number is small)

Jun 08,2020

Generate boxed reaction networks (niche formation)
I found that winning species don't have networks that systematically are able to harvest more energy. If I calculate the mean energy harvested by these species, according to their reaction networks, this one is of the same order as the energy harvested by the loosing species. 
If I impose a tradeoff in the costs, things get caotic as fuck. I no longer have less resources when more species... I no longer have a positive correlation for low richnesses... It is fucked uuup. Time to investigate reaction networks.
It is so different, that sometimes the slope of the line is >> 1. Even when there are many points. 
When I plot individual performance of all organisms vs the community performance, I find a weak stripped pattern. This indicates that organisms in the same strip share something. I want to investigate what is this that they share. I will start by histogramming the individual performances to identify the strips (high frequencybins should correspond to the strips). When I identify this communities, I should plot the individual reaction network of this guys.
I have plotted the community network for all communities and there is no apparent pattern. This makes sense because neither specialists nor generalists win. Try not using Tikhonov's costs, what are the community networks in this case?
The length of prediction$stable.states is less than the length of surv_networks. Investigate why. Maybe clean up code.
Checked that if I have a fixed cost, dynamics are dominated by generalists

Jun 09,2020

When plotting the community reaction networks, I find that the lower part of the matrix is always coloured, indicating that individuals that have reactions involving the lower metabolites are more popular. I think this is because the reactions proceed in only one direction. Thus, there will be a net flow of metabolite and the last metabolites will be produced more abundantly. Therefore, strains possesing reaction that involve the last metabolite will be favored. This doesn't seem very realistic. To avoid it, I can impose a gradient of energy in the metabolites, so that even if you have reactions in the lower part of metabolite space, you are not favored by its big abundance.

I want to investigate 4 main questons: 
	1. Have repeated and continuous coalescence events contributed to the high microbial diversity in some habitats, such as the soil?
	2. Do 'hybrid' communities exhibit a broader functional range and higher productivity compared with communities entering a coalescence event?
	3. Will members of communities with a history of coalescence have a higher persistence upon interaction with a 'naive' community?
	4. Can we predict properties of coalescent communities using approaches derived from the study of interacting networks?

Can I treat a community network as an organism?

Calculate how the networks varies with time. Particularly, record the modularity of the network over time.
Also can track how the 'individual' modularity of both networks varies with time, and how the 'total' modularity of the resulting network varies with time. I would do this to try to find temporal coherence before they fully merge. This coherence would suggest that these communities interact as internally integrateed units rather than just as a collection of many species that sudenly interact with another collection of species. The species replacement in a coalescent process of this type occurs within these newly  interacting integrated units rather than a more stochastic rearrangement of interactions within the entire new network. This type of network dynamic is an emergent property of the whole network, which arises from the fact that components of local communities can in some cases act as whle units with strong intersactions within these units and weak interactions between. 

I could include in the costs, reactions that are very energetic, so that you don't really get to do that because it costs so much.
On the previous note, I wonder how could I include randomness in the costs in a justified manner. Right now the randomness in the costs comes from the reaction network, which is not random at all! There are a fixed number of different reaction networks. The apparent randomness stems from the fact that the number of strains in a simulation is very small compared to the number of strains that can exist. I shall keep it like that and come back to it later.

Jun 10,2020

What I want to do this week: Start performing community coalescence events and record candidates to community fitnesss on the way. inbetweeness, in-degree, out-degree.

Check why my analysis.R script is failing to plot all communities!!

Can I make my reaction network generator a faster one?


Jun 16,2020

So currently, when I randomly choose 5 species (ie, pick a reaction network with N_reac = unif(1, 45), and bring the system to equilibrium, generalists remain at equilibrium more frequently than specialists. Since the best equilibrium is that reached when all resources are depleted simultaneously most efficiently, to beat a generalist we need many specialists that cover the same niche breadth. The problem is that since I am only sampling 5 species, it is very unlikely to draw 5 specialists. This problem can be solved in two ways:
	If he pool of competing species is complete (I include in the system all the posible reaction networks), in which case, since I am not including randomness at any point (all reaction network have been sampled), the solution is unique, and no preference would be given to generalists over specialists. However, this seems computationally fucked up
	If I limit, like you did, the number of reaction networks to a very low one. However, this seems unjustified.

Plan for this week: 
	1. Implement a measure of individual fitness based on the initial growth rate
	2. Calculat F numerically as sum_i log(R_i/T_i)
	3. Calculate cohesion of a community.
	4. Calculate the total flux (degree) of the network

Step 2 is completed. I verified that the quantity F is minimized under the given dynamics.

Before going into steps 3 and 4, I am going to program the coalescent communities. 

Depending on the power of the tradeoff in my  cost model I get different number of reaction networks at equilibrium. 

Tomorrow, I need to adress: why are some F still 0? How are those communities?

Jun 17,2020

I have programed the coalescent communities. I find that for one pair of communities, one goes extinct and the other one survives. This is a phenomenon that I would not be surprised to find in most of the communitiy coalescences. 

I neet to investigate the F's still, and calculate the total flux (degree) of the network, and workout the units.
Make one community coalesce, iteratively, and record F. See if it increases
What about the correlations??
What measures of cohesion do we have?

Jun 18,2020

I have verified that the system is deterministic, ie, the equilibrium doesn't depend on the initial conditions.

delF doesn't seem to predict well the similarity of the outcome of the community. Let me check that things are working by examining the plot of abundances when similarity is about 0.6, and then I will start working in cohesion...

Jun 19,2020

I would like to impose a maximum on the favorable surplus due to having more reactions. There is a point where the

Jun 20,2020

It seems that lowering reaction number opens up for niche creation and increases richness.. although, maybe not.

Jun 22,2020

Should I weight my cooperation index by abundance?
I am calculating the intrinsic and the pairwaise interaction. What does this remind me to? To a matrix! Can I organize a matrix of facilitations?????
Tomorrow: debug and test

Jun 23,2020

Today I calculated another predictor of community coalescence output. It is the ratio of two quantities: cohesion and competition. I hypothesized that in a community coalescence event, the cohesion is maximized, and the competition is minimized. 
To calculate the cohesion of a community, I summed up all the coopperation indices. The cooperation index that species i has with species j is measured by how many products of species i are also substrates of species j, and viceversa. The total cooperation index between two species is thereefore the sum of c_ij and c_ji.  
To calculate the competition level of a community, I summed up the competition indices of each pair of species. The competition index between species i and j is the number of substrates that i shares with j.

I don't know if I need to  divide the cohesion and competition by the number of terms I am adding. Check if the denominator I am thinking of adding would cancel for s  = 4.

Check what aree the communities like? how are these matrices when I make them compete?

Are there two regimes? one more hierarchical, of one generalist and several specialists? and another one horizontal, with only specialists? To check this, reduce drastically the number of reactions that a strain can posses

Jun 25,2020

When plotting (facilitated-provided)/competition against stable state, most of the times I obtain a positive correlation. I observe that whenever a species is very succesfull and doesn't have many reactions, like 1, this reaction is normally towards the end metabolite. Is this a real effect? or should I decrease the energy of metabolites as I go down the chain?
Maybe, the cases where the above coefficient is low and the stable state is indeed high, its because even though positive interactions with the neighbours is small, the neighbours do very well, and therefore the strain with low interaction is benefitting from the interactions its neighbours have: is there a way to consider second order interactions?

Because of the thermodynamic constraint, we can only consider reactions in one direction. Therefore, the number of posible edges is the same as that of an undirected graph. Yes, this graph is directional, but unidirectional, so given two metabolites, there is only one posible conection between them. In this sense, maybe some properties of the random Erdos and Renyi graphs apply to my case. 

Can I find a critical facilitating index (or smartness index) under which the species goes extinct?

providing-facilitation is a measure of generosity. There is a correlation between abundance and generosity. Sometimes its positive and sometimes its negative. What makes the correlation be negative or positive?

Jun 27,2020

I have decreased the energy per metabolite, but still the bottom metabolites win because there is just so much of it. There is a threshold under which the strain that poseses 8-->9 can't survive anymore, because the energy it obtains isn't enough for grwth. When this happens, the most succesful metabolite is the one that has 7-->8

Jun 28,2020

I should record the mean generosity and competition level of the community, weighted bya abundances maybe, as time goes by, for a cummunity of 1000 species initially
To record the correct similarity, instead of looking at what sepecies remain, which is the similarity of composition, I should look at the similarity of resource consumption. The similarity between the community reaction network. 


Jun 28,2020

I want to plot the abundance before and after community coalescence.
Also check that the species that remain in the community after coalescence have recruited each other ie, their interaction is high.
Look at interaction intensity between species to predict which ones will work well. How can you look at higher order interactions?
Top down coselection is weak because its thee trash that the microbe is dealing with. 
Should I measure dissimilarity between two communities with the Jaccard and Bray-Curtis distances? Maybe the community reaction network doesn't change that much, even though the sppecies do: a universal reaction network

Jun 29,2020

The dominants are the most generous because they normally use metabolite 8 (high in degree) and yield 9, which is utilized by none. This is a trivial result, but also opens the research of bottom-up co-selection.

Things to do for next weeek

	1. Plot time series for community coalescence.
	2. Check what are things like in the eregime of high number of reactions.
	3. To check for higher interactions with distant neighbours, represent the facilitation matrix as a network and visualy inspect it
	4. See if the total flux through of the community drives community coalescence.  
	5. Record evolution of competititon, facilitation and providing through time, to see deeply what changes in the dynamics. 
	6. What resource flux goes through each metabolite at each timepiont?
	7. Histogram the degree distribution of these networks
	8. Try the diversification option
	9. Plot heatmap with number of reactions, and where are they in the metabolite space

